Tutorials (#221)
applied-material-modeling/neml2: doc/tutorials/contributing.md

@insert-title:tutorials-contributing

[TOC]

## Model development

> Although NEML2 comes with a large collection modular building blocks for composing material models, it is sometimes necessary to write your own material models (and integrate them with existing NEML2 models). The [extension](#tutorials-extension) tutorial set demonstrates how a custom model can be implemented within the NEML2 framework and provides in-depth explanation for every step throughout the development process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although NEML2 comes with a large collection modular building blocks for composing material models, it is sometimes necessary to write your own material models (and integrate them with existing NEML2 models). The [extension](#tutorials-extension) tutorial set demonstrates how a custom model can be implemented within the NEML2 framework and provides an in-depth explanation for each step in the development process.
```

@insert-page-navigation

## Documentation

It is of paramount importance to write documentation as the library is being developed. While NEML2 supports both Doxygen-style in-code documentation mechanisms and runtime syntax documentation mechanisms, it is still sometimes necessary to write standalone, self-contained documentation.

To this end, the "dev" configure preset and the "dev-doc" build preset (see [build customization](@ref build-customization)) can be used to generate and render the documentation locally:
```
cmake --preset dev -S .
cmake --build --preset dev-doc
```
Once the documentation is built, the site can be previewed locally in any browser that supports static HTML, i.e.
```
firefox build/dev/doc/build/html/index.html
```

## Code formatting and linting

The C++ source code is formatted using `clang-format`. A `.clang-format` file is provided at the repository root specifying the formatting requirements. When using an IDE providing plugins or extensions to format C++ source code, it is important to
1. Point the plugin/extension to use the `.clang-format` file located at NEML2's repository root.
2. Associate file extensions `.h` and `.cxx` with C++.

> The Python scripts shall be formatted using `black`. Formatting requirements are specified under the `[black]` section in `pyproject.toml`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Python scripts must be formatted using `black`. Formatting requirements are specified under the `[black]` section in `pyproject.toml`.
```

All pull requests will be run through `clang-format` and `black` to ensure formatting consistency.

For C++ linting, a `.clang-tidy` file is provided at the repository root to specify expected checks. Python linting is not currently enforced.

## Naming conventions

### Reserved axis names

> Recall that NEML2 models operates on _labeled tensors_, and that the collection of labels (with their corresponding layout) is called an labeled axis ([LabeledAxis](@ref neml2::LabeledAxis)). NEML2 predefines 6 sub-axes to categorize all the input, output and intermediate variables:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Recall that NEML2 models operates on _labeled tensors_, and that the collection of labels (with their corresponding layout) is called a labeled axis ([LabeledAxis](@ref neml2::LabeledAxis)). NEML2 predefines six sub-axes to categorize all the input, output and intermediate variables:
```

- State \f$\mathcal{S}\f$ (axis name `state`): Variables collectively characterizing the current _state_ of the material subject to given external forces. The state variables are usually the output of a physically meaningful material model.
- Forces \f$\mathcal{F}\f$ (axis name `forces`): Variables defining the _external_ forces that drive the response of the material.
- Old state \f$\mathcal{S}_n\f$ (axis name `old_state`): The state variables _prior to_ the current material update. In the time-discrete setting, these are the state variables from the previous time step.
- Old forces \f$\mathcal{F}_n\f$ (axis name `old_forces`): The external forces _prior to_ the current material update. In the time-discrete setting, these are the forces from the previous time step.
- Residual \f$\mathcal{R}\f$ (axis name `residual`): The residual defines an _implicit_ model/function. An implicit model is updated by solving for the state variables that result in zero residual.
- Parameters \f$\mathcal{P}\f$ (axis name `parameters`): The (nonlinear) parameters.

\note

> When authoring C++ source code, it is recommended to avoid hard-coding reserved axis names as pure strings. Instead, inlined `const` string names (defined in `neml2/models/LabeledAxisAccessor.h`) shall be used wherever possible, they are `STATE`, `OLD_STATE`, `FORCES`, `OLD_FORCES`, `RESIDUAL`, and `PARAMETERS` whose names are self-explanatory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When authoring C++ source code, it is recommended to avoid hard-coding reserved axis names as pure strings. Instead, inlined `const` string names (defined in `neml2/models/LabeledAxisAccessor.h`) should be used wherever possible, they are `STATE`, `OLD_STATE`, `FORCES`, `OLD_FORCES`, `RESIDUAL`, and `PARAMETERS` whose names are self-explanatory.
```

### Variable naming conventions

Variable names are used to _access_ slices of the storage tensor. Variable names have the type neml2::VariableName which is an alias to neml2::LabeledAxisAccessor. The following characters are not allowed in variable names:
- whitespace characters: input file parsing ambiguity
- `,`: input file parsing ambiguity
- `;`: input file parsing ambiguity
- `.`: clash with PyTorch parameter/buffer naming convention
- `/`: separator reserved for nested variable name

In the input file, the separator `/` is used to denote nested variable names. For example, `A/B/foo` specifies a variable named "foo" defined on the sub-axis named "B" which is a nested sub-axis of "A".

### Source code naming conventions

In NEML2 source code, the following naming conventions are recommended:

> - User-facing variables and option names should be _as descriptive as possible_. For example, the equivalent plastic strain is named "equivalent_plastic_strain". Note that white spaces, quotes, and left slashes are not allowed in the names. Underscores are recommended as an replacement for white spaces.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- User-facing variables and option names should be _as descriptive as possible_. For example, the equivalent plastic strain is named "equivalent_plastic_strain". Note that white spaces, quotes, and left slashes are not allowed in the names. Underscores are recommended as a replacement for white spaces.
```

- Developer-facing variables and option names should use simple alphanumeric symbols. For example, the equivalent plastic strain is named "ep" in consistency with most of the existing literature.

> - Developner-facing member variables and option names should use the same alphanumeric symbols. For example, the member variable for the equivalent plastic strain is named `ep`. However, if the member variable is protected or private, it is recommended to prefix it with an underscore, i.e. `_ep`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Developer-facing member variables and option names should use the same alphanumeric symbols. For example, the member variable for the equivalent plastic strain is named `ep`. However, if the member variable is protected or private, it is recommended to prefix it with an underscore, i.e. `_ep`.
```
